Hey, Chang. Welcome to Talk Python To Me.
Hey, how are you?
I'm excited to be here.
I'm doing a little while.
I'm excited to have you here.
We're going to talk about Lance DB, multi-dimensional data,
all sorts of fun multimodal data, all sorts of fun things.
So really cool database, kind of in the same category,
SQLite, DuckDB.
People want a quick mental model, but different kind of data, right?
Yeah, absolutely.
So I think we specialize in multimodal data or AI data.
And what we think about as included in that is the tabular data that we have from previous
generations of data engineering, data science, but also embedding vectors, images, videos,
PDFs, basically anything that don't really fit neatly
into data frames or Excel sheets.
RICK VISCOMI: Yeah, less tabular data.
RICK VISCOMI: That's right.
RICK VISCOMI: It's not good tabular,
you need something else probably.
RICK VISCOMI: Yep, yep.
RICK VISCOMI: Awesome.
RICK VISCOMI: Which is pretty interesting since I
was one of the earliest co-contributors to Pandas.
So I spent years of my life working on data frames
and big data.
You've given up on squares and rectangles?
Oh my gosh.
Well, never, but I think there's room
to build something more here.
Yeah, I hear you.
And also, I agree.
So it's going to be super fun to dive into all of that stuff
together.
Before we do, though, let's hear your story.
How do you get into programming?
I know this is written in Rust, but also has some programming
APIs.
How much Python are you doing these days versus other languages?
Yeah, well, the core of Lance format and LanceCV are in Rust.
And then there are Python APIs and wrappers around that, as well as TypeScript.
And the team spends a significant amount of time thinking about what the Python user experience looks like
and how best to combine the performance that you get from Rust and the user views you get from Python.
And then also making it more as extensible as possible
so that even though it's a Python library,
if you want to add features, for example,
you don't have to learn Rust just to be a contributor to Lance or LanceDB.
You know, I think Python has benefited a lot
from the various Rust-based projects out there, right?
Obviously, we've got uv and Ruff.
We've got Pydantic, a bunch of other things that make it faster.
But there has been some pushback that if everything gets done in Rust, then it's hard for Python people to contribute.
I don't necessarily subscribe to that because previously the answer was when things are too slow, we write them in C.
Maybe it's just traditional Python people also know C, but traditional Python people don't also know Rust.
I think that's honestly the crux of the issue or the crux of the pushback.
So I really like to hear that, you know, the extensibility points and, and you've thought
through like how Python people can extend it and contribute and stuff.
Yeah.
I've spent a lot of time, writing like Cython and C, to, to make Python code
go faster, back in the day.
I think, yeah, I think you're right.
A lot of the points are the same for, for Rust and actually Rust is a lot safer actually.
So when we, we originally started Lance in the very beginning in C++ and we spent months,
we spent months writing C++ code for a new format.
And, I think it was the, it was Christmas break of 2022 that that's what I call,
our rust pill moment was when we decided to switch over.
And I think we ended up, you know, we took about three weeks and we rewrote roughly
roughly four or five months of C++ code there.
Overall, I think we actually ended up
getting better performance for the most part.
I think the biggest thing was just us having
the confidence to move forward very quickly without that,
like in the back of our mind,
like where's the next sexual coming from?
Yeah. Yeah. Oh, absolutely.
Or the next security vulnerability because you
Exactly.
Did an S print F, not at one of the safe variants or whatever.
It's been a long time since I've done C++.
But tell me about that process.
I don't know how many people are working on the project at this time
and how much experience you all had with Rust.
Why did you make that choice and how did it go?
Oh, yeah.
I'm a Rust neophyte.
Before that Christmas of 2022, I've never written a line of Rust.
Most of our team are also new to Rust,
or they're new when they join LanceDB.
And I think what helps is that most of them
were also already proficient in CC++.
So the core thinking around algorithms and design
is all the same, performance and all that.
and the Rust language makes it just easier to learn.
You're more productive and it's just safer.
And I think one of the surprising benefits that we saw
that I don't see people talking about a lot,
and maybe that's just us not being very good at CMake,
is that productivity piece.
When we were writing lots of C++ code,
we spent tons of time just wrestling with CMake
to make the builds work.
And once we moved to Rust,
Cargo just made that so easy.
Basically, we spent zero time wrestling with that.
Wow, that's pretty wild.
So you all were pretty new to Rust.
How much do you think that LLMs,
ChatGPT,
Mistral, Llama,
all these things,
the availability to just go,
hey, chat thing,
How do you do this in Rust? Here it is in C++.
Do you all find that beneficial? Did you all do this?
Sometimes. So we use a lot of coding aid,
so from Copilot to Cursor, Continue, Zed.
We try out lots of different tools as well.
I think certainly the quality of the tooling matters,
But at the core of it, there's that model performance.
And so the models today performs pretty well on Python and TypeScript, but on Rust, much less so.
Oh, interesting.
Yeah.
And so we always joke about, God grant me the confidence of ChatGPT coming up with random Rust syntax.
Yeah, I've had that as well.
I asked for some how to do this in Python,
because I was feeling lazy or something.
I just needed it for an example real quick.
And it said, you use this.
It looked completely plausible.
It was converting time zones and date times.
And just the time zone part of it was driving me nuts.
I'm like, all right, chat, let's do this.
And it just made up stuff.
So you're going to use this function or this property
based on this.
No, that doesn't exist.
I'm like, that doesn't exist.
Try again.
Oh, I'm so sorry.
Let me try another one.
Yeah. What's interesting is I think that in Python, if you're looking at really well-known libraries out there, it generally does much better.
But even for long-known libraries that don't have as much training corpus or attention focus on it, it tends to hallucinate a lot.
even for something you know like at apache arrow like uh pyero kind of api um you know it's the
it's the standard for in memory in memory data but the chattypd still makes up apis for that and
and also i think if you were looking at um in terms of like the effect on the developer community
so there are lots of times where i've seen either like hacker news posts or comments on hacker news
posts where there's a choice between two similar libraries.
And then I think the commenters are like, well, I'm choosing A because ChatGPT or
copilot generates better completions for that one.
How interesting.
Which is really interesting.
I've never thought about that.
But yeah.
Wow.
You know, the Python, the PSF and JetBrains Python developer survey that came out, one of
really interesting stats is 50% of the people who filled out that survey said
they've been doing professional software development for less than two years.
Wow. That is surprising.
50% of all Python developers, less than two years.
And I think there's got to be a strong pull for, yeah, I could go research that.
Let me just ask chat first and see what it says.
Right.
Or check ask Copilot or whatever tools they're using.
you know yep yep actually yeah i mean i think that's um you know now that i think about it yeah
i do i do feel like that's a that's probably that shouldn't be surprising um and and also what's
what's interesting i think i've noticed kind of the same thing with um ai versus you know previous
generations of machine learning in previous generations it was all python um with ai there's
huge TypeScript community that has formed around AI.
And then also just up in previous generations of machine learning,
you had to have years of training to learn math and stats and data analytics
and data science before you're a productive machine learning engineer.
And I think today it's with AI,
it's definitely not the case that you could quickly through some experimentation
and self-learning to become a fairly proficient AI engineer,
which is also a new term that's been coined in the last two years.
Amazing.
It's going to be really interesting to see how this affects the industry.
On one hand, it's going to supercharge people getting going faster,
help them become unstuck if they're stuck on a problem.
But it could also end up hollowing out deep knowledge maybe in the long term.
I'm not entirely sure.
Yeah, we'll see.
Yeah, you know, that is very interesting.
I do think that, so what we're seeing is, you know, there's a lot of focus around sort
of model capabilities and then maybe like RAG and, you know, how to marry context and
knowledge bases to the model through, you know, vector search and vector databases.
But what we're seeing a lot is more traditional and large enterprises are now starting to adopt AI in wholesale.
And the way they're thinking about it is, you know, let's build an excellence center around AI internally and make AI applications easily accessible to the rest of the company across many different groups.
so that you don't have to worry too much about AI infrastructure,
where the data is stored, how that interfaces with a model,
and maybe just think about more at the business level and the user level
how you want these things to work.
So I think that deep knowledge around AI, statistics, machine learning
will probably start to coalesce around these centers of innovation
within these large enterprises.
And of course, within AI native startups, they all have to have much deeper knowledge in advance of the rest of the market to stay ahead of the curve.
Yeah.
It's interesting.
And I started to see these bots.
We'll get to the database in just a second.
I started to see these bots as kind of almost replacing search.
I find myself, maybe I'll just skip search.
Maybe we'll just ask this thing because I got a good shot of a good answer straight away rather than.
Right, right.
And that kind of ties into this enterprise thing.
Like, you know, searching Google is a little bit tricky sometimes.
I use cat or whatever you're using.
It's tricky because there's SEO tricks going on.
There's ads.
There's a lot of stuff where you're like, is this really relevant?
And I think that's probably even worse than trying to search within your enterprise.
It's like, do we have documents on this or whatever?
It's probably just like, here's a 175 email email thread.
Like, no, no thanks.
This isn't going to help.
Right, right.
Let's talk LanceDB and multimodal data.
And I guess maybe that's the place.
Before we get into the details of Lance, what is multimodal data anyway?
Yeah, absolutely.
So like I was saying earlier, I think with AI data, vectors and embedding vectors,
is just scratching the surface.
One of the most powerful things about AI
is that it makes it a lot easier
to interact with the multimodal
or unstructured data that we have.
And so if you're thinking about images, videos,
audio forms, 3D point clouds,
there's a lot that's happening in generation
in things like autonomous vehicles.
But even for traditional enterprises,
right you have just just oodles of like pdf documents or slide decks and there's lots of
use cases for a tool that can help those users extract the extract insights and then possibly
train models on top of those on top of that kind of data and so you know i think if you look at
if you look at data by volume, right,
you know, if you look at your average,
like TPCH data table,
it's like, what, like 150 bytes
or something like that per row.
And then embeddings, you know,
if you just look at the previous generation
of OpenAI, it's like, you know,
25 times that.
And then if you look at images and videos,
you're quickly getting to these tables
where even if you have the same number of rows,
the data is just huge.
So it's not,
username, address, and a few other things are still simple.
Yeah.
So when we talk to a lot of our customers
who are trying to build this new,
what they call unstructured data lake,
the expectation, they are already coming in with expectations.
Okay, in terms of data volume,
this is going to trounce the existing previous generations of data lakes.
And then not only that-
before but now we've got big data right yeah this is even bigger and and it's not only that each row
is bigger but you know previous generations of tooling you have um you know you like users or
humans manually generating one data point at a time and now you know ai is generating its own
training data at thousands of tokens per second right you know when you're when you're doing
completions that completion itself becomes training data and so the volume at which
the data is increasing is also growing at very, very rapidly.
Yeah.
If anyone wants to get a sense for just how intensely the world is focused on this, they
just reopened Three Mile Island, the nuclear power plant, purely to plug in a single Azure
data center for AI.
So yeah, I think we're putting a lot of energy into generating data.
What would you say?
Yeah.
Well, I'm glad this data center, even if something goes wrong, the consequences will be much less dire.
Yes.
Honestly, I think nuclear is worth considering rather than coal or whatever.
But still, that's a whole different discussion.
We don't need to go down that hole right now.
Maybe later at the end.
Who knows?
I mean, yeah.
Yeah.
There's a crazy amount of...
You can turn this show into talk politics instead.
No.
No, no, no.
Please no.
No.
It's too early.
So let's talk about something-- maybe dissect,
kind of like what the H2 or the one sentence elevator pitch here
for LanceDB is.
So I'll read it out, and we'll take it apart,
and you make sense of it for all of us, OK?
LanceDB is a developer-friendly, open source database for AI.
From hyper-scalable vector search and advanced retrieval
for RAG to streaming data, interactively exploring
large scale AI sets.
Best foundation for your AI application.
Yeah, so open source for starters, right?
Go over here to GitHub.
You can see just under 10,000 stars, which is--
congratulations.
That's excellent.
Actually--
So we're adding--
Across the different bits.
But yeah, so really cool.
And it's under the Apache 2 license.
That's pretty open for people to do most things what they want, right?
Maybe not build a closed source business on top of, but.
Right, right.
Yeah.
So I think if the way we're thinking about it is,
like, there's a base layer of how do you work with AI data?
And we've made Lance format, which is open source,
a columnar format that's optimized for AI.
And on top of that, we're building
the different workloads that allow our users and customers
to search, retrieve, run analytical queries,
run training workloads across the board
for all of their AI needs across the enterprise.
So the repo that you're looking at,
which is LanceDB open source, that's one of the tools
that we built on top of the Lans format.
And the idea is when you--
a super common workload is you want
to start experimenting with building rag or agents
with memory semantic search, AI-enabled semantic search,
like text image and video search and things like that.
LanceDB is sort of the easiest way for you to get started and prototype.
So like you said in the beginning,
the mental model would be something like equivalent to like a SQLite or DuckDB.
Right.
So the data is just a file.
There's no service to manage.
There's nothing to sort of connect to.
It's totally open.
So you can look at it from with other tools that you have.
And then the actual database.
I totally.
Yeah.
I love this idea.
I believe, I think things like SQLite and Lance DB, I think this, I just have a file and it,
there's a really smart engine on top of that file instead of a complex server architecture to run
and manage and security and firewalls and all of that, migrations, all these things. It's really
pretty positive, I think, to just say, you can just have a file. You can just run it. When your
app is running, it's part of your app. And when your app shuts down, it saves the data and it
shuts down with it, right? Totally. Yeah. And one of the interesting things we've,
a couple of interesting things about the, you know, it's just a file is I think we took that
a little bit further than that.
One is I think that we wanted the file to be open
and so that you can inspect it,
you can work with it using your other tools, right?
So when you're building that AI application,
one is if you have more than just that search
and the vector lookup.
There's, you know, you might want to run SQL
to look at metadata.
You might have, you know, tensors
that will upload to PyTorch training workloads
and things like that.
And then we wanted that layer.
So we wanted that file to be accessible
by all your familiar tools, right?
From like Pandas and Polars,
you know, new data frame engines like DAF, for example.
And even, you know, distributed engines like Spark and Ray.
So that was one big thing that we focused on
with Lance Format is making it plug in into the ecosystem.
So that, you know, for folks who are coming with a Python background and a data background, working with AI would feel familiar, right?
Right.
A lot of people know how to do SQL to ask questions about their data, even if they're not programmers, right?
Maybe a business analyst is like, well, I can write a query, maybe connect that result to some graph or whatever, right?
Yeah, exactly.
And this is why I think this was the primary reason why we chose Apache Arrow as the standard interface and the standard type system so that it's easy to plug in all these other tools on top.
Excellent.
So a good question to the audience out there from Carol is, how's the integration with Narwhals?
You know, I am not familiar enough with Narwhals.
So narwhals is a layer that will let you work with multiple data frame libraries.
So if you wanted to work with, say, pandas and Polars, you could use this, and it will
adapt, depending on what the original data source is, it'll adapt everything to a subset
of Polars commands.
So maybe the question is, how does it work with Polars or pandas, right?
So maybe if it does with one or the other,
then there might be a way to connect it.
Yeah, so basically the core interface input-output is Arrow.
And then with LAN-CB, on the output end,
you can convert results to Pandas data frames or Polars data frames.
And then on the input end to, I think natively,
we can take Pandas data frames as batches of input,
But we convert that to arrow tables.
And so for others, it's like pullers, for example,
it's really easy to convert pullers to an arrow table.
So a lot of that, even if it's not already automatic,
it's like dot two arrow one command away.
Yeah.
Oh, awesome.
Yeah, Carol added, given it works with the arrow,
it probably just works.
Yeah.
Nice.
Awesome.
OK.
Yeah.
So the other thing, too, is when I think, you know, when we talk about a file, we don't just mean your local file system, but also object store.
So if you throw the data set on S3, you can just query it directly.
Now, you know, you'll hit additional latency because object store, but it works.
So a lot of our users see that as a bridge into production so that, you know, they use Lansi B open source to do the prototyping MVP.
And then, you know, they if their use cases fit before they need like a distributed system, it's easy for them to just say, hey, the embedded library lives in my application code.
And then I have a shared data layer in S3 or maybe in EFS or something like that.
And you can run distributed queries very easily still without having to manage your own additional systems.
Okay.
Just use a really scalable storage layer like S3 or probably anything that has an S3 compatible API.
Yeah, anything that's like a POSIX compliant interface or an S3 compliant API.
And this is where also the rest community-
Yeah, exactly.
I think MinIO published their own integration with LAN-CV as an example as well.
Oh, did they?
Okay.
That's cool.
Maybe tell people real quick what MinIO is.
It sounds like you're familiar with it, or I can.
Yeah, go ahead.
Yeah, so MinIO is like, I'm not sure if I got the right website pulled up,
but it looks like it.
So MinIO is a self-hosted, high-end, sort of pretty complete version
of what you would think of as S3.
But if you don't want to use S3, you want to host on your own infrastructure
with your own storage layer and things like that,
but you still want to talk S3 APIs and security and all that stuff.
Yeah, that's what MinIO is.
Yeah, pretty neat.
Yep, totally.
Yeah.
Yeah, and so we really took It's Just a File really, really far.
And I think the results end up speaking for itself.
We're seeing really good results.
And I think it really matches with the way that a lot of our users think about existing tooling
and how to add AI to their existing business and applications.
cool so we might be getting just a little bit ahead of ourselves but we'll backtrack and talk
apis and how it works and stuff but what's the you know if it's just a file which you said is
obviously like a pretty broad statement by that right the way you all right but what's the go to
production story right yep absolutely if you're using sqlite and that's your middle model you're
like well you probably should just switch to postgres right but it doesn't sound like that's
your answer it sounds like you've thought it through on how to run it at larger scale
right right so um in terms of large-scale production um there's a number of different
workloads for both online and offline so um so this is our commercial offering um calling land cb
enterprise um and essentially it's one distributed system that gives you a huge scale
low latency, high throughput, a system that can be backed by the same LANs data.
It's just a file in S3.
So the trick is to create that distributed system in a way that allows you to enjoy the
cost efficiency of Object Store and the scalability of it while being very, very fast and very
performant.
And so that's the production story for our customers who, you know, are putting AI applications into production where they need high throughput or they need very large index sizes or just lots of, to manage lots of vectors and query a small portion of it without the same sort of budget constraints as like you would with
OpenSearch or other tools that doesn't give you that compute storage separation.
Right. Oh, very cool. So it says it has GPU support for building vector indexes, which is
pretty awesome. Databases, indexes are, they're like the magic speed dust you can sprinkle on
them, obviously. What's the story with indexing and this GPU support?
Yeah, so I think with traditional database indices,
it's not very computationally intensive.
Unfortunately for vector indices and NN indices,
they're quite so.
So I think with Rust, you can make CPU-based indexing
for vector data pretty efficient.
So if you're looking at hundreds of thousands
or even up to maybe 30 or 50 million vectors,
You know, CPU indexing is pretty good and can get pretty fast.
But for our customers that have, you know, 15 billion vectors in one table that they need to index one index, that's, you know, that's going to take days.
All right. So with with GPU support, you know, we cut that down by more than like 15, 20 X.
So then it becomes like a something that they can do repeatedly and have a, you know, acceptable feedback loop in terms of, you know, maybe adding new data, refreshing that index.
And I think a lot of it, this is also what I love about the composable data ecosystem.
And we talk about that, but there's also, I think, there's also an extension, which I'd like to add, is like that composable AI data ecosystem.
So we talked a little bit about the benefits of like having arrow, which is just means if we make the input output APIs arrow, it just works with the rest of the ecosystem.
And so, and this is one of the points where we git additional benefits, where with GPU support, it's easy through that arrow interface to actually talk to PyTorch.
So we can use a lot of the GPU tooling in PyTorch to build a lot of our accelerated vector indexing tools.
So that way saves us lots of time messing with CUDA interfaces and things like that that are not quite mature in the Rust ecosystem yet.
I see.
Yeah, and it's something you don't have to build.
It just gets better on its own and you just get to upgrade it.
Exactly.
Yeah.
That's part of the magic of package managers and package repositories and stuff.
It's really cool.
So what is the workflow? Like, take me through the journey that somebody might go on, they have a
bunch of data, they want to put it into the database, and they want to put the resulting
thing into production so that they could use it behind an API or something that they're
implementing for their app or something like that. Is there a big training block of time that you do
and then you move the resulting data somewhere?
Or do you just put it in production
and start adding to it over
and just keep adding to it over time?
What's the workflow?
Yeah, so with the LansDB Enterprise,
like the system that's running,
you can just keep adding data to it.
The indexing and all of that is automatic
once you've configured it properly,
which is just, you know, here's the schema
and like create indices on these columns, right?
much like what you would do with a Postgres table.
And then once you have that set up
and as you add data, the indexing is automatic.
And then for small amounts of data,
our users typically will say like have Python dictionaries,
JSON, or Pandas data frames,
they can add those to the database through the API.
For really large scale data,
So if you're working with terabytes or even petabytes of data,
you don't want to be shoving that through the API like a thousand rows at a time.
So this is where the open data layer comes in.
So if you have a large data set and you have, you know, whether it's Spark or Ray,
you can use those large distributed systems to write data directly to S3 in the in Lens open source format.
And then the system actually picks it up from from object store and takes care of the indexing
and compaction and all of that.
So it's sort of like when we're talking about adding data to it,
it's both.
OK.
Yeah, that sounds really cool.
So I'm talking to you on a Mac Mini M2 Pro
with maxed out RAM and four terabytes of space or something.
Can I do interesting stuff on my computer?
Is it too small?
Oh, it's not too small at all.
I think one of the things about LAN's format is it's all disk, right?
So most of the magic that we talked about with LAN-CV, at least open source, lives in that open source format layer.
And that format is three things in one.
One, there's the columnar format, the file format, and then there's a table format, and then there's the indexing.
So the indexing is what speeds up the NN vector lookups.
And typically, we've made the index disk base
so that if you're looking up a few partitions in the index,
it's only loading those partitions.
And so the RAM requirement is actually quite small.
And so on your systems, probably the more limiting factor
is going to be the disk size rather than how much memory.
you have.
Yeah, OK.
A couple of terabytes.
I should be able to put some data on that.
Yeah, exactly.
A couple of free terabytes, that is.
All right, let's talk about the architecture a little bit,
maybe a look inside.
Like give us a-- you've talked about some of the pieces
and formats, but give us a sense here.
Yep.
And so this is sort of an architecture
that includes more than just Lance,
but it's more about how our customers are thinking
about building their own multimodal data lake.
So we call this like vector data lake
or unstructured data lake.
And there's no standardized terminology yet,
but this is what I was mentioning before.
- Nice.
Yeah, I'll just add for the listeners,
I'll put a link to a diagram that talks about this a little bit.
People can check out if they want.
So the idea is from these companies' perspective, they now have, on the one hand, they have lots of data that they can now take advantage of because of new AI models and applications.
And on the other hand is there's lots of business units across that enterprise that wants to experiment with AI or add AI applications, whether it's agents or internal tooling or customer success, video and image search and lots of different use cases where there's a lot of like, hey, can you sprinkle some AI magic dust on my existing business?
and maybe look for that 10x in terms of ROI.
And so we have all this SharePoint data.
Can you help me out?
Exactly.
That's literally a conversation.
I'm sure that it is.
Because SharePoint is bad
and you don't want anything to do with it.
But people keep putting stuff into it.
I don't know.
Yeah, yeah.
Amazing.
Yeah, and so it's not just about the AI capabilities,
but how do you build this base layer
and make it a lot easier to access
for the rest of the folks in the company?
And most of these companies aren't starting from scratch.
They already have made significant investments
into the data science and analytical tooling,
training for their data scientists, analysts,
and they also made significant investments
into their existing data lake
for large-scale data processing.
So you don't want to make them have to throw all that away.
And instead, that open data layer is super important to plug into the rest of their existing ecosystem.
And with Lance, unlike Parquet or JSON or WebDataSet, all of their multi-bono data can live in one place.
So that they can do search and retrieval on the vectors.
They can run SQL.
they can do do training and data processing workloads all sort of in one engine and one
piece of data so it makes just it just makes things a lot simpler it allows us to add a lot
more performance optimizations and then it saves because of the size issue it also saves
these enterprises a lot in terms of cost so that they don't have to keep making different copies of
different parts of the data for different parts of that workload.
Right.
This thing needs that format of the data.
That thing needs that format of the data.
Right.
Exactly.
Yeah.
And or things like, so I'll give you like two, two examples that really stuck out to me.
So one, I was speaking with one user recently and they have, you know, they're doing EDA
and DuckDB, right?
So they have lots of metadata.
They're doing EDA and DuckDB.
Wait, don't we got acronym police?
What's EDA?
Oh, sorry about that.
Exploratory data analysis.
OK, got it.
Yeah.
Sorry, carry on.
Right, so they're running SQL in DuckDB,
but then they need to fetch--
there's like 10 columns of images and 10 columns of multi-vectors.
And so at the end where they finish running that join and filter,
it takes just ages to fetch that data.
So whether because of the lack of random access support
across the board.
So then you have to think about other tooling,
either distributed engine or somehow just load
all of your data in memory.
And that's also not tenable.
Whereas with LANs format, because you can do random access
very quickly, you can actually just quickly move
on to the next step in the same Python application.
And because it works with DuckTP,
you can get the row IDs out, fetch the rows,
and then quickly move on to downstream processing,
whether it's for like train a UMAP or something like that.
So that is just one small example where Lance makes it
so that new workloads just works with existing tooling.
There's another--
That interop layer is really nice.
Yeah.
And another example is around--
and again, this is like the size changes everything,
where we spoke with folks that are like,
we manage a bunch of image and video data in, let's say,
web data set.
And we want to iterate on our model.
And to create new features means we
have to download terabytes of web data set, which
are basically tarballs.
open up the tarballs, compute the feature from that data,
put it back in the tarball, and then upload it.
So to access one small piece and write a small piece,
you often are downloading or transferring 100x that
because of the large multimodal data.
Whereas with something like LANCE,
instead of using web data set, the table format features
of Lance allows you to just keep that data in place,
just add a new column which writes a new file.
And then you can--
and then the readers can just see an updated version of that
with new schema.
And you can move forward not having
to pay that transfer cost.
And it's not just the infrastructure cost,
but also in the time that your engineers are spending
on that, managing that process.
and just running across maybe petabytes of that data.
That's a crazy amount of data.
Yeah.
So let's talk about--
let's keep it in mind that this is an audio-only format,
primarily.
Let's talk through what it's like to write a little bit of code,
you know, connecting to the database, doing some queries,
or adding some data.
You guys have a quick start on here.
Maybe you could just talk us through real quickly
on how to get started in Python with it.
Yeah.
So overall, the goal for the quick start is you have a package
that you install in seconds.
And then depending on how quickly you're
running through the quick start, that between a minute to five
minutes, you've got a quote unquote,
vector database running, embedded vector database running,
where you can start building applications on top.
So the first step is very familiar.
you just run pip install lancedb.
And that pulls in lancedb.connect,
and installs our Rust packages.
And then you can start connecting to it.
So the default is you just give it a local file path,
and you say lancedb.connect.
And then that gives you a database connection, which--
and there's two flavors of that, a synchronous client
and an asynchronous client.
I love it.
Yeah.
So the async is basically just connect underscore async.
And roughly, the interfaces are roughly equivalent.
There's some disparities which we're addressing now.
But the main difference is you just sprinkle some await
in places.
The async and await keywords make concurrent programming
so much easier than threads and callbacks and all that business.
For sure.
Yeah.
So the connect bit is if people are familiar with SQLite,
you just-- here's a URL to a file.
That's pretty much-- you give it that.
And then you have--
what's your naming convention on the async API?
Are all the functions ending in underscore async?
Or do you create an async client?
Or how do you differ?
We create-- yeah, that's a good question.
Yeah.
create an async client, the method names are the same between the two. And it's really just
that initial connect call that's different. I see. But that's kind of the factory method for
the client, either sync or async that comes back. And then you know what you got.
Right. So the second example, we see that in action. So first step is let's create a table
and let's add some simple data to it.
So let's say we have two fields,
an item and a price,
and then an embedding vector.
Here for the example, we're just going to use two digits for that vector.
In practice, of course, it's going to be like 1,500 or 3,000 or something like that.
Yeah.
That's how you print on your code.
Right, right. Yeah. So here we just have, you know, essentially digits of pi here. And then you can see whether you have the async connection or the sync connection, both you call create table, you add it, you give it the table name, and then optionally, you can give it data to initialize it.
And there's some, yeah, so if you have data initially, the schema is inferred from the data that you provide it when you call create table.
If you go to the next example, you can also initialize an empty table that has with just a schema.
So here in this quick start, you can have a arrow schema.
And basically, this is the same schema as the data before,
but you create an empty table, and then you can add data to it later.
I think I should update this, but I think what's more convenient
is that we've, as you see in the box below,
you can actually, we've added pedantic support.
So there's a translation layer between pedantic and arrow schemas.
And so it's, I think for a lot of our Python users, it's much easier to think in terms of pedantic objects as the data model, rather than manually dealing with the Pyro API to create a schema.
Like, you know, like how do I, we saw lots of issues where users like, well, how do I create a fixed size list?
What is a fixed size list?
And, you know, like, why does my vector has to be, have to be that?
you know, is it float? Should I do float 32 or 64? There's lots of stuff that is just much easier
to think of in terms of Python types and Python objects.
I love the Python, the Pydantic integration there. That's super cool. The data layer used for my
course of website and the podcast website and stuff is all based on Beanie and Mongo, which is
async basically you're writing async queries against pydantic models which is you know it's
a real got the validation but you're not writing directly to the database and just random dictionaries
and who knows if it stays consistent so speaking of which you have a schema here is this uh how
hard how strictly is this enforced right is this postgres level or is this mongadb level like uh
this is probably yeah this is right this is fairly strictly enforced so think okay think like arrow
tables and you know writing to writing arrow tables i think there's some there's a little bit
of magic uh there's a little bit of like give around like nullability because a lot of times
if you're providing data um the types can be inferred which is it's easier to do casting
And then if you're inferring like nullable versus non-nullable, that can get you in trouble when you're inserting data.
So for example, if you have a non-nullable column that you've declared in the schema, but new data coming in,
sometimes that translation layer into Arrow just automatically turns it into a nullable,
even though you didn't give it any nulls in the data.
And then when you insert it, it'll produce an error.
Do you respect things like optional typing
in Pydantic models to control nullability,
like optional float versus float being not nullable?
Yeah.
So we do a bunch of that as well.
So in terms of pedantic integration,
it's another Rust project.
We've loved working with it for a long time.
If any listeners are out there that's interested in just messing with like pedantic and arrow.
So that translation layer, I think we'd love to get some help as well.
So for some of the more like complicated nested types out there.
So where that's like lists of lists or lists of fixed with lists and dictionaries and that kind of thing.
The translation layer is incomplete.
But we know a couple of other companies and tools in the ecosystem
who've also built their own kind of translation layer.
So it would be really interesting, I think,
if there was a community member who can lead, say,
like, let's get a bunch of projects together
and let's create a standardized translation layer.
I think that would be--
MARK MANDEL: Not everyone just doing their own copy, right?
JOHN MUELLER: Right, right.
And then maybe like either Pedantic or maybe Arrow,
one of the two projects can own that translation layer.
I think that would be really great for the ecosystem.
Yeah, that sounds like a fantastic idea.
And let's maybe wrap up our little code sample here
with talking about querying the database or doing a search.
Because it's fun.
I know it is fun to put data into a database
and define schemas, but the actual purpose
is to ask questions, right?
That's right.
Yeah, and so we wanted to make it so that it's really familiar for people who've worked with databases and data frame engines.
So the main workload for, excuse me, the main workload for Lansi B open source is that search API.
So when you, you can say table.search
and you can pass in the vector, the query vector,
and then you can call dot limit to say
how many results we want.
And then a dot two underscore, you know, blah, blah, blah
to determine what format you want the results back.
So you have two pandas here in the example,
but you can convert it to polars
and just get it back as a list.
JOHN MUELLER: Awesome.
That's really cool.
I love it.
And then-- oh, and also a couple of other things.
So here, you can also do--
if you have a Pydantic model that you use as the table schema,
you can also say to pedantic and pass in the model.
And it'll automatically return a list of pedantic objects
back to you.
JOHN MUELLER: Oh, that's cool.
This is particularly useful for multi-step agent workflows
where you want that structured data,
and it's easy to connect it to the rest of your--
Right.
You would just maybe want to take your pedantic
and say, turn that into JSON and hand it over to the next agent
or something like that.
Exactly.
Yep.
Nice.
So in addition to creating--
if we move forward in that example a little bit.
Yeah.
In addition to setting up the schema,
there is also the embedding API that's really interesting.
So that when you create the schema--
so here's an example where we can create the schema using
pedantic.
So in this block, I've declared the class
words, which is a Lance model.
And the Lance model is just a pedantic-based model
that knows how to convert itself to Arrow.
and then i have two fields in here text and vector and what i what we have in lan cb
is an embedding registry where you can hear i declared a function of embedding function called
func and basically i call get registry dot get open ai dot create and i give it the name of the
embedding here we're using ada2 but you know new new models have been released since and i can use
the pedantic annotations to to say hey the text field is the source field for that function
so it's text string equals func dot source field um and then the function itself knows how many
dimensions it is so i don't need to think about like how many dimensions this the vector the
embedding has um and then once i've once i've declared this schema i can call the familiar dot
create table workflow and then i can call table.add to add data to it and here because i've declared
the embedding function in the schema i don't actually have to generate the embeddings myself
so in this example i've i'm only passing in the text field as input um that's really cool yeah
just takes care of calling the open ai api on your behalf and then adding the vectors before you know
adding the whole batch to the table so open ai was was our first one but there's dozens of compatible
embedding models so pretty much anything you can pull off hugging face um you know like and then
there's lots of um other vendors like coherer for example um if you were running open source like
olama um there's also an a integration for that nice you can use some of the on machine ones
potentially as well.
Exactly, yeah.
So a lot of the ones you can pull off Hugging Face
can just run locally.
And it exposes the options.
So if you do have, for your Mac Mini
or even your MacBook laptop, there are options.
There are lots of Hugging Face models
where you can specify NPS to actually make it run
a little bit faster.
Oh, nice.
That uses the neural processing units or something
instead of CPU or GPU.
you.
OK.
Yeah.
OK, that's cool.
I didn't know that.
Very nice.
And it looks like--
I did want to ask you, what's the integration with things
like OpenAI or Gemini or other things?
It looks like a lot of LanceDB is kind of for you building
your app that is self-contained.
But also, here's integration with some of the OpenAI, API stuff.
What's, how much should I, how much do you depend on using other external AI systems versus just your own?
Right.
So I think typically the embedding model is you either bring your own run locally or you call a third party API.
And then the actual completion, right?
That's outside of the scope of LanceDB.
So the prompt engineering and the calling
the completion model once you have the context retrieved,
that's not part of the LanceDB API.
That said, so we integrate with, let's say,
like a LangChain or a LAMA index.
So if you're comfortable with that layer of sort of AI
orchestration or RAG orchestration,
you can use their APIs and plug in LanceDB into that.
So that takes care of a lot of that,
the other parts of the workflow.
And then if you're in the, let's say, AWS ecosystem,
and you're familiar with Bedrock and things like that,
there are a few AWS folks who've built a complete serverless
Rack Stack where they're using the bedrock APIs for embedding creation and then for completion.
But then they have Lance data that's sitting on S3 and they're running Lance DB open source
in an AWS Lambda function so that you can essentially have, you don't have to manage
any servers and just be calling serverless functions to build your Rack application.
It sounds super cool.
All right, we're getting short on time.
Let's wrap it up with a couple of things here.
First of all, we have the open source LanceDB.
You talked about the enterprise stuff as well.
Let's just talk business on a while really quick.
I think it's always interesting to see companies that have maybe OpenCore
or some kind of open source foundation and how you guys are making this work
for both contributing to open source but also eating.
yep what's the what's the story here right right so um yeah i mean it's it's always uh
i think it's always a very complicated topic um i think the way that we think about it is
um your your journey building building ai so um when you're just starting out and you're doing
that prototype and that MVP, a lot of times you don't even know the value of the thing that you
want to build or whether it works. So why would you want to go through the hassle of managing
complicated infrastructure or pay a third-party vendor to just have some small amounts of data?
So we wanted to make LAN-CB open source super easy for you to just get started.
and also just bridge you into production in that early stage.
The cloud and enterprise offerings are essentially for
when you go into production and you want to have
a super scalable and highly performant vector database
where you still don't have to worry about the infrastructure,
but you have lots more challenging systems needs.
And so LansDB Cloud, it's a hosted serverless offering.
So for small teams that have production needs,
but maybe don't have billions of vectors
or really challenging security requirements and things like that.
And LASDB Enterprises, we really have,
OK, I need 1,000 to 10,000 queries per second.
I have just a ridiculous amount of data
to catch myself before I curse.
And on prem.
Yeah, and I need my data to live on on-prem.
And so the enterprise comes in in two different packages.
One is a managed offering where you can bring your own bucket,
and then we just run the compute for you
and give you a private link.
Or it can be fully--
we call it BYOC.
So it runs within the customer account.
So nothing leaves the premises except for basic telemetry data.
Yeah, nice.
Awesome.
All right.
And then, you know, quickly close it out with, I guess, what's next?
Like, where are things going here?
I see LanceDB Cloud is in private beta, early access mode.
Where are you all going?
Yep.
So I think there's a couple of really exciting things.
So first on the open source, our vision for Lance
is to make it the standard for working with AI.
So I think we already have lots of folks
who are depending on Lance with image data, video data,
large scale training.
And we'll continue to make that better.
And then add additional encoding.
So for folks that not just have those,
but compressing text data and the metadata they have
to make it as efficient as possible.
And I think there, between Lance and Lance-EB,
I think we just broke through 2.2 million monthly downloads.
So we're really excited about that and that community uptake as well.
And we're getting lots of community collaborators and contributors,
and we're looking to grow that community.
So on the open source side, it's better APIs,
more automation around the data management like compaction,
and then just better encodings for the non-large blob types,
smaller strings, numerical data, and things like that.
And then for LanceDB Enterprise, a lot of times,
if you have to look at the whole search engine,
so right now, our customers still have to do the chunking and embedding themselves,
But we're basically looking to make it much easier
for those types of workloads, not just in terms of productivity,
but to also save them cost as well in terms of embedding.
So a lot of times what we find is our customers
will update a table with a new version that's like 80% the same.
And so if we have the right APIs and manage
the embedding calls for them, we can essentially
save 80 of that cost in terms of embedding apis without complicated sort of um like query cache
or embedding cache that has more complexity right so uh and then just deepening the so
complete more complete search engine for ai and then on the offline side uh complete complete
features at scale around um building that training pre-processing and exploratory data analysis
workflow for those types of customers.
- Awesome.
Well, it looks like a really cool product
and set of services and nice work.
- Thank you.
- Yeah, thanks for being here.
Final parting thoughts, people wanna get started
with LanceDB, what do you tell them?
- Oh, come to our Discord.
And I think, I forgot if you have the,
if I give you the...
I don't know if I have the link, but give it to me,
and I'll put it in the show notes for people later.
Yeah, sounds good.
So come to our Discord.
We're all in there, and it's pretty active,
and we respond fairly quickly.
And there's not a lot of noise,
so it's mostly sort of practical topics,
debugging and talking about new features,
maybe having a little bit of fun with new examples
and things like that.
Awesome.
All right, well, thanks for being here.
See you later.
Thank you.
Продолжение следует...